1911 - 1920
In 1912, the university came under intense pressure from the people of southern California to create
a new, rival institution. To answer the calls, but without wanting to concede to creating a new
university all together, the university’s president, Benjamin Ide Wheeler recruited Ira Woods
Howerth from the University of Chicago to create a strong Extension presence in the southern parts
of the state. It turned out that Howerth was even more of an idealist than Stephens and openly
stated his vision for Extension to serve the people of the state in the ways they wanted and needed
to be served, irrespective of University ideals. To achieve this objective, he designed a trailblazing
organizational structure and implemented visionary new departments: Beyond the original class
instruction, he revived the popular public lectures and added entertainment to them, he created
departments for debate and public discussion as well as information and social welfare. To reach
even more people, he pioneered correspondence instruction and allocated an entire department to
it which served up to 5,500 students in 1917. Extension also began working with other institutions in
offering classes to specific audiences whose need for education was particularly telling-for instance,
the inmates at San Quentin and Folsom prisons. In 1915, Extension ventured into new forms of
education and set up the Department of Visual Instruction to exploit the new motion picture
technology for educational purposes. Howerth was an idealistic visionary clearly ahead of his time,
and as such the university implemented regulatory bodies that govern Extension until today,
including the Academic Senate Committees on Extension (1912) and Courses of Instruction (1913). In
1917 Extension began offering courses in Los Angeles a full two years before the university finally
gave in to the calls of the public and in 1917 established its second campus, UCLA. By the time
Howerth was let go from the university while serving in World War I in 1918, he had managed to
establish Extension as the fundamental institution and model of the higher and continuing
education it is today in California and around the world. At the end of the first world war, California
experienced an economic boom accompanied by a dramatic increase of population, which meant
that suddenly there was a greater need, and more money available, for education to offer its basic
academic curriculum, Extension began providing vocational and training courses to thousands of
veterans and to others eager to compete in new industrial markets.